# Prerequisites and preliminaries

## 1. Logics

### and `逻辑与`  

$P$ and $Q$ is true if both $P$ and $Q$ are true and false otherwise.

> 仅 $P$ 与 $Q$ 均为真的时候表达式的值为真。  

### or `逻辑或`

$P$ or $Q$ is true in all cases except when both $P$ and $Q$ are false.

> 仅 $P$ 与 $Q$ 均为假的时候表达式的值为假。  

### implies `逻辑蕴含`

"$P$ implies $Q$" is also written as "if $P$, and $Q$", "$P \Rightarrow Q$"  
It's false if $P$ is true and $Q$ is false; it is true in all other cases.

> 仅 $P$ 为真且 $Q$ 为假的时候表达式的值为假。  

### if and only if `逻辑等价`  

"$P$ if and only if $Q$" is also written as "$P$ implies $Q$ and $Q$ implies $P$", "$P \Leftrightarrow Q$"  
It's true exactly when $P$ and $Q$ are both true or both false.

> $P$ 与 $Q$ 均为真或均为假时表达式的值为真。

### not `逻辑非`  

It is not the case that P.
It's true if and only if P is false.

> 仅 $P$ 为假的时候表达式的值为真。  

## 2. Sets and classes

[Gödel-Bernays Set Theory (冯・诺伊曼-博内斯-歌德尔集合论)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Von_Neumann%E2%80%93Bernays%E2%80%93G%C3%B6del_set_theory)

### class `类`  

A **class** is a collection of objects (elements) such that given any object $x$ it is possible to determine whether or not $x$ is a member (or element) of the class.

> 对于一个类，给定任意元素，可以确定该元素是否为这个类的成员。  

### belong `属于`

$x \in A$ means that $x$ is an element of $A$.  

> $x$ 是 $A$ 的一个元素。  

### not belong `不属于`

$x \not \in A$ means that $x$ is not an element of $A$.  

> $x$ 不是 $A$ 的一个元素。  

### equality `类等价的性质`  

1. $A = A$
2. $A = B \Rightarrow B = A$
3. $A = B$ and $B = C \Rightarrow A = C$
4. $A = B$ and $x \in A \Rightarrow x \in B$

### [axiom of extensionality](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Axiom_of_extensionality) `外延公理`  

Two classes with the same elements are equal.Formally, $[ x \in A \Leftrightarrow x \in B ] \Rightarrow A = B$  

### set `集合`  

A class $A$ is defined to be a **set** if and only if there exists a class $B$ such that $A \in B$.  

### proper class `真类`  

A class that is not a set is called **proper class**.  

> 真类是不为集合的类。  

### [axiom of class formation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Axiom_schema_of_specification) `分类公理`  

For any statement $P(y)$ in the first-order predicate calculus involving a variable $y$,
there exists a class $A$ such that $x \in A$ if and only if $x$ is a set and the statement $P(x)$ is true.
We denote this class $A$ by $\{ x | P(x) \}$, and refer to "the class of all $x$ such that $P(x)$".

!!! example "A example of proper class"

    Consider the class $M = \{ X | X\ is\ a\ set\ and\ X \not \in X \}$  
    For if $M$ were a set, then either $M \in M$ or $M \not \in M$.  
    But by the definition of $M$, $M \in M$ implies $M \not \in M$ and $M \not \in M$ implies $M \in M$.  
    Thus in either case the assumption that $M$ is a set leads to an untenable paradox: $M \in M$ and $M \not \in M$  

### subclass `子类`  

$A$ is a **subclass** of class $B$ (written $A \subset B$) provided:  

$$
\mathrm{for\ all\ } x \in A,\ x \in A \Rightarrow x \in B
\tag{1} \label{ref1}
$$

By the [axioms of extensionality](#axiom-of-extensionality) and the [properties of equality](#equality):

$$
A = B \Leftrightarrow A \subset B\ \mathrm{and}\ B \subset A
$$

### subset `子集`  

A subclass $A$ of a class $B$ that is itself a set is called a **subset** of $B$.  
A subclass of a set is a subset.  
> 作为一个子类的集合被称为子集，集合的子集仍是子集。

### empty set `空集`  

empty set is also written as null set, $\emptyset$  
It's the set with no elements.  
Given any $x$, $x \not \in \emptyset$.  
The statement $x \in \emptyset$ is always false.  
The implication $\eqref{ref1}$ is always true when $A = \emptyset$.  
$\emptyset \subset B$ for every class $B$
> 空集是没有任何元素的集合

### proper subclass `真子类`

$A$ said to be a **proper subclass** of $B$ if $A \subset B$ but $A \not = \emptyset$ and $A \not = B$

!!! warning "与之前所学真子集的对比"

    之前所学的真子集不要求$A \not = \emptyset$

### [power axiom](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Axiom_of_power_set) and power set `幂集公理与幂集`

For every set $A$, the class $P(A)$ of all subsets of $A$ is itself a set.  
$P(A)$ is called the **power set** of $A$, it is also denoted $2^A$.  

### family of sets `集族`

A **family of sets** indexed by (the nonempty class) $I$ is a collection of sets $A_i$, one for each $i \in I$ (denoted $\{A_i | i \in I\}$)

### union and intersection of a family `集族的并与交`

Give [such a family](#family-of-sets), it's **union** and **intersection** are defined to be respectively the classes  

$$
\bigcup_{i \in I} A_i = \{ x | x \in A_i\ \mathrm{for\ some}\ i \in I\};
$$

$$
\bigcap_{i \in I} A_i = \{ x | x \in A_i\ \mathrm{for\ all}\ i \in I\};
$$

If $I$ is a set, then suitable axioms insure that $\bigcup_{i \in I} A_i$ and $\bigcap_{i \in I} A_i$ are actually sets.

### disjoint `不交集`

If $A \cap B = \emptyset$, $A$ and $B$ are said to be **disjoint**.

### relative complement `相对补`

If $A$ and $B$ are classes, the **relative complement** of $A$ in $B$ is the following subclass of $B$:  

$$
B - A = \{ x | x \in B\ \mathrm{and}\ x \not \in A\}
$$

### complement `补`

If all the classes under discussion are subsets of some fixed set $U$ (called the universe of discussion), then $U - A$ is denoted $A'$ and called simply the **complement** of $A$.

### statements `一些结论`

$$
A \cap (\bigcup_{i \in I} B_i) = \bigcup_{i \in I} (A \cap B_i) \ \mathrm{and} A \cup (\bigcap_{i \in I} B_i) = \bigcap_{i \in I} (A \cup B_i)
\tag{2} \label{ref2}
$$

$$
(\bigcup_{i \in I} A_i)' = \bigcap_{i \in I} A'\ \mathrm{and}\ (\bigcap_{i \in I} A_i)' = \bigcup_{i \in I} A'
\tag{3} \label{ref3}
$$

$$
A \cup B = B \Leftrightarrow A \subset B \Leftrightarrow A \cap B = A
\tag{4} \label{ref4}
$$

$\eqref{ref3}$ are [DeMorgan's Laws](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/De_Morgan%27s_laws)

## 3. functions

### function, map, mapping `函数，映射`

A **function** (or **map** or **mapping**) $f$ from a class $A$ to a class $B$ (written $f:\ A \rightarrow B$) assigns to each $a \in A$ exactly one element $b \in B$.

$b$ is called the valve of the function at $a$ or the image of $a$ and is usually written $f(a)$.

$A$ is the **domain** of the function (sometimes written $\mathrm{Dom} f$) and **B** is the **range** or **codomain**.

Sometimes it is convenient to denote the effect of the function $f$ on an element of $A$ by $a \mapsto f(a)$.

Two functions are **equal** if they have the same domain and range and have the same valve for element of their common domain.
                                               a

### restriction `映射的限制`

If $f:A \rightarrow B$ is a function and $S \subset A$, the function from $S$ to $B$ given by $a \mapsto f(a),\ \mathrm{for}\ a \in S$ is called the **restriction** of $f$ to $S$ and is denoted $f|S:S \rightarrow B$.

### identity function `恒等函数`

If $A$ is any class, the **identity function** on $A$ (denoted $1_A:A \rightarrow A$) is the function given by $a \mapsto a$.

If $S \subset A$, the function $1_A|S:S \rightarrow A$ is called the **inclusion map** of $S$ into $A$.

### composite `复合函数`

Let $f:A \rightarrow B$ and $g: B \rightarrow C$ be functions. The **composite** of $f$ and $g$ is the function $A \rightarrow C$ given by $a \mapsto g(f(a)),\ a \in A$.

The composite function is denoted $g \circ f$ or simply $gf$.

If $h: C \rightarrow D$ is a third function, it is easy to verift that $h(gf)=(hg)f$

> 函数的复合满足结合律

If $f:A \rightarrow B$,then $f \circ 1_A = f = 1_B \circ f : A \rightarrow B$

### image `函数的像`

Let $f: A \rightarrow B$ be a function. If $S \subset A$, the **image of $S$ under $f$** (denoted $f(S)$) is the class $\{b \in B | b=f(a)\ \mathrm{for\ some}\ a \in S\}$

The class $f(A)$ is called the **image of $f$** and is sometimes denoted $\mathrm{Im} f$.

If $T \subset B$, the **inverse image of $T$** under $f$ (denoted $f^{-1}(T)$) is the class $\{a \in A|f(a) \in T\}$. If $T$ consists of a single element, $T=\{b\}$, we write $f^{-1}(b)$ in place of $f^{-1}(T)$.

#### some facts of image `函数的像相关结论`

$$
\mathrm{for}\ S \subset A,f^{-1}(f(S)) \supset S
\tag{5} \label{ref5}
$$

$$
\mathrm{for}\ T \subset B,f(f^{-1}(T)) \subset T
\tag{6} \label{ref6}
$$

For any family $\{T_i | i \in I\}$ of subsets of $B$,

$$
f^{-1}(\bigcup_{i \in I}T_i)=\bigcup_{i \in I}f^{-1}(T_i)
\tag{7} \label{ref7}
$$

$$
f^{-1}(\bigcap_{i \in I}T_i)=\bigcap_{i \in I}f^{-1}(T_i)
\tag{8} \label{ref8}
$$

### injective, surjective, bijective `单射，满射，双射`

A function $f:A \rightarrow B$ is said to be **injective** (or **one-to-one**) provided $\mathrm{for\ all\ }a,a' \in A, a\not=a'\Rightarrow f(a)\not=f(a')$.

Alternatively, $f$ is injective if and only if $\mathrm{for\ all\ }a,a' \in A, f(a)=f(a')\Rightarrow a=a'$.

A function is **surjective** (or **onto**) provided $f(A)=B$; in other words, $\mathrm{for\ each\ }b \in B,b=f(a),\ \mathrm{for\ some\ }a\in A$

A function $f$ is said to be **bijective** (or a **bijection** or a **on-to-one correspondence**) if it is both injective and surjective.

For any class $A$, the identity map $1_A:A\rightarrow A$ is bijective.

> 恒等函数均为双射函数。

#### some facts of injective, surjective and bijective `单射满射双射相关结论`

For maps $f:A\rightarrow B$ and $g:B\rightarrow C$,

$$
f\ \mathrm{and}\ g\ \mathrm{injective} \Rightarrow gf\ \mathrm{is\ injective}
\tag{9} \label{ref9}
$$

$$
f\ \mathrm{and}\ g\ \mathrm{surjective} \Rightarrow gf\ \mathrm{is\ surjective}
\tag{10} \label{ref10}
$$

$$
gf\ \mathrm{injective} \Rightarrow f\ \mathrm{is\ injective}
\tag{11} \label{ref11}
$$

$$
gf\ \mathrm{surjective} \Rightarrow g\ \mathrm{is\ surjective}
\tag{12} \label{ref12}
$$

### Theorem 3.1 `逆映射`

Let $f:A\rightarrow B$ be a function, with $A$ nonempty.

1. $f$ is injective if and only if there is a map $g:B\rightarrow A$ such that $gf=1_A$.
2. If $A$ is a set, then $f$ is surjective if and only if there a map $h:B\rightarrow A$ such that $fh=1_B$.

??? note "Proof"

    $(\Leftarrow)$

    由恒等函数皆双射，$\eqref{ref11}$ 和 $\eqref{ref12}$ 知必要性成立。

    $(\Rightarrow)$

    1. $f$ 为单射，则对于任意 $b \in f(A)$ 总存在唯一的 $a \in A$ 使得 $f(a)=b$.

        选择一确定的 $a_0 \in A$，定义映射 $g:B \rightarrow A$ 如下：

        $$
        g(b)=
        \left\{
        \begin{aligned}
        a\ &\ \mathrm{if}\ b\in f(A)\ \mathrm{and}\ f(a)=b \\
        a_0 &\ \mathrm{if}\ b\not\in f(A)
        \end{aligned}
        \right.
        $$

        显然有 $gf=1_A$

    2.  $f$ 为满射，故对于任意 $b \in B$ 都有非空集 $f^{-1}(B)\subset A$.

        对每个 $b \in B$ [选择](#选择公理)一个 $a_b \in f^{-1}(b)$，则映射 $h: B\rightarrow A,h(b)=a_b$ 满足 $fh=1_B$

The map $g$ is called a **left inverse** of $f$ and $g$ is called a **right inverse** of $f$.

If a map $f:A \rightarrow B$ has both a left inverse $g$ and a right inverse $h$, then $g=g1_B=g(fh)=(gf)h=1_Ah=h$, and the map $g=h$ is called a **two-sided inverse** of $f$.

The two-sided inverse is unique.

> 双侧逆映射唯一

$$
\mathrm{If}\ A\ \mathrm{is\ a\ set\ and}\ f:A\rightarrow B\ \mathrm{a\ function,\ then}\ f\ \mathrm{is\ bijective}\ \Leftrightarrow f\ \mathrm{has\ a\ two-sided\ inverse.}
\tag{13} \label{ref13}
$$

The unique two-sided inverse of a bijective $f$ is denoted $f^{-1}$,
$f$ is a two-sided inverse of $f^{-1}$ so that $f^{-1}$ is also a bijective.

## 4. relations and partitions

### [axiom of pair formation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Axiom_of_pairing) `配对公理`

For any two sets $a,b$ there is a set $P=\{a,b\}$ such that $x \in P$ if and only if $x = a$ or $x = b$.

If $a=b$ then $P$ is the singleton $\{a\}$.

The **order pair** $(a,b)$ is defined to the set $\{\{a\},\{a,b\}\}$;
its **first component** is $a$ and its **second component** is $b$.

$(a,b)=(a',b')$ if and only if $a=a'$ and $b=b'$.

### Cartesian product `笛卡儿积`

The **Cartesian product** of classes $A$ and $B$ is the class $A \times B = \{(a,b) | a \in A,b \in B \}$

$A \times \emptyset = \emptyset = \emptyset \times B$

### relation `关系`

u
A subclass $R$ of $A \times B$ is called a **relation** on $A \times B$.

If $f:A \rightarrow B$ is a function, the **graph** of $f$ is the relation $R=\{(a,f(a))|a \in A\}$.
Since $f$ is a function, $R$ has the special property:

$$
\mathrm{Every\ element\ of}\ A\ \mathrm{is\ the\ first\ component\ of\ one\ and\ only\ one\ ordered\ pair\ in}\ R.
\tag{14} \label{ref14}
$$

Any relation $R$ on $A \times B$ that satisfies $\eqref{14}$, determines a unique function $f:A \rightarrowB$ whose graph is $R$.
Whenever convenient we shall think of a function as a relation satisfying $\eqref{14}$.

### equivalence relation `等价关系`

A relation $R$ on $A \times A$ is an **equivalence relation** on $A$ provided $R$ is:

$$
\mathrm{reflexive:}\ (a,a) \in R\ \mathrm{for\ all}\ a \in A;
\tag{15} \label{ref15}
$$

$$
\mathrm{symmetric:}\ (a,b) \in R \rightarrow (b,a) \in R;
\tag{16} \label{ref16}
$$

$$
\mathrm{transitive:}\ (a,b) \in R\ \mathrm{and}\ (b,c) \in R \rightarrow (a,c) \in R;
\tag{17} \label{ref17}
$$

If $R$ is an equivalence relation on $A$ and $(a,b) \in R$, we say that $a$ is equivalent to $b$ under $R$ and write $a~B$ or $aRb$.

### equivalence class `等价类`
